This week we reviewed sessions II.4 and II.5. We learned that Jason has a cool loft.

## Homework

II.6, II.7. Review: try II.5, exercise 2.

## Why are sections and retractions so named?

Lots of ways to slice this banana: retractions tell you that one set is smaller than another, sections can be thought of as partitioning the domain by treating the function as an equivalence class, internal digrams, so on so forth.

## II.5, Exercise 1

Fix functions `bc : B -> C`, `ab : A -> B`, `ac : A -> C` such that `bc . ab = ac`. Prove that for all `1a, 1a' : 1 -> A`
`ab . 1a = ab . 1a' => ac . 1a = ac . 1a'`.

Proof. Left compose `bc` on both sides to get `bc . ab . 1a = bc . ab . 1a'`. Simplify to get `ac . 1a = ac . 1a'`.

### Is the converse true?

Yes. Fix functions `ab, ac`. We will construct a `bc` such that `bc . ab = ac`.

Let `bc` be a function from the image of `ab` (which is a subset of the codomain `B`) to `C`; such that `bc(y) = ac(x)`
for all `y = ab(x)` in the image of `ab`.

To prove that `bc` is a well-defined function, we will need to prove that

1. `bc` is defined for all elements in the domain of `bc`, which is just the image of `ab`. We assert this trivially holds.

1. `y1 = y2` implies `bc(y1) = bc(y2)`. So suppose `y1 = y2`.

    1. We know `ab(x1) = y1 = y2 = ab(x2)` for some `x1, x2`.

    1. Let `1a, 1a' : 1 -> A` be the functions corresponding to `x1, x2`.

    1. `ab(x1) = ab(x2)` implies `ab . 1a = ab . 1a'`.

    1. By the property we assumed to prove the converse, we now also know `ac . 1a = ac . 1a'`.

    1. Therefore `bc(y1) = bc(ab(x1)) = ac(x1) = ac(x2) = bc(ab(x2)) = bc(y2)`. QED.
   

## II, pre-sessions, exercise 12

How many isomorphisms are there from a set of three to a set of three? How many automorphisms are there?

Answer: you can treat this as how many different ways are there to pick three balls out of a bag,
which is a question of permutations. The answer in this case is 3 permute 3, which is 3!, which is 6.

## Long discussion about monomorphisms and retractions

In the end we all had a different picture in our minds. The takeaway is that
morphisms _are_ epi or mono, but _have_ retractions and sections (which themselves
are morphisms). The semantics here are not all that important; it's more
important to interrogate a morphism about surjectivity and injectivity, which
tell you all sorts of interesting things, such as relative size of the domain and
and the codomain.

Interesting Wikipedia fact: in the category of sets, the axiom of choice
is true if and only if every epi is a retraction of some morphism. That is,
the two statements are equivalent.
  
