# Homework

Sessions 21 and 22

# Session 21, Exercise 2

This is an exercise from CS Theory 101 if we note the following things:

* `C_n` is just the [cyclic permutation](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Cyclic_permutation) of order `n`;

* [Multiplying two disjoint cycles of order `n` and `m` yields a cycle of order `lcm(n, m)`](http://math.stackexchange.com/questions/527810/permutations-and-symmetric-groups);

* `C_12 x C_8` is isomorphic to this product of two permutations: `(1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12)(A B C D E F G H)`, which is indeed two disjoint cycles;

* Therefore, the order must be `lcm(12, 8) = 24`; and

* Therefore, the product is isomorphic to `C_24`.

An alternative proof:

Let `(a, b) \in C_12 x C_8`. Then `(C_12 x C_8)^24 (a, b) = (C_12^24 (a), C_8^24 (b)) = ((C_12^12)^2(a), (C_8^8)^3(b)) = (i^2 a, i^3 b) = (a, b)` where `i` is the identity endomap. Therefore, `C_12 x C_8` has a cycle of length 24. It is not too difficult to additionally show that this is the order (the smallest possible cycle).

# Session 21, Exercise 1

The answer above will aid us here. Let's rephrase the question: Without loss of generality, the day clock cycle be `C_24` and the shift clock be `C_8`. Is there an arrow in the category of endomaps from the endomap `C_24` to some endomap `f` such that `C_24 = f x C_8`?

This is a confusing question because it asks you for an arrow when all you really need to produce is `f`, the object. We know from above that `C_24 = C_3 x C_8`, as `24 = lcm(3, 8)`. Is there an endomap from `C_24` to `C_3`? Yes, the obvious one where each `n` maps to `n % 3`.

It's true that our solution isn't an "intuitive" map. There's no way to make sense of the fact that hour 16 (part of the `Eve` shift) maps to the number number `16 % 3 = 1` in `C_3`. But this is valid within the premises of the question.

### Remarks

The book examines an invalid solution, which involves the arrow mapping `0..7` to `Night`, `8..15` to `Day`, and `16..23` to `Eve`. But this isn't even a valid arrow in the category of endomaps! What was the point of talking about this arrow? To demonstrate that not all arrows in `S` correspond to arrows in `Endomaps(S)`? We already knew that from a past chapter! Perhaps the real takeaway is that `(Night Day Eve)`, while isomorphic to `C_3`, can't just be used to divide `C_24` into the "intuitive" map where the night hours map to `Night` and the day hours map to `Day` and so forth. But what an odd and confusing way to teach that lesson.
