## Homework

Sections 14, 15, 16

## Impossible journeys (exercise 11.8)

Let J be the graph `{(0, 0), (1, 0), (1, 1)}`.

Let G be any graph, with distinct vertices `b, e`. The book is sloppy and makes no such distinction `b != e` but we will, as the proof hinges on it.

Let `f : G -> J` be a map from `G` to `J` such that `f(b) = 0` and `f(e) = 1`. We claim that `f` exists iff there is no path in `G` from `b` to `e`.

### Forwards

First assume that `f(b) = 0` and `f(e) = 1`. Suppose for a contradiction that a path from `b` to `e` exists. Let the path be `b -> v0 -> v1 -> ... -> vn -> e` for some `n >= 0`.

We know that maps between graphs 'preserve' edges, in that if `v -> w` is an edge in graph `G` then `f(v) -> f(w)` is an edge in graph `J`.

Thus there must also exist a path `f(b) -> f(v0) -> ... -> f(vn) -> f(e)`. Since `f(b) = 0` and `f(e) = 1`, then this means there is a path from `0` to `1` in `J`, which we know is not true. Therefore there can be no such `f` where `f(b) = 0` and `f(e) = 1`.

### Backwards

This is much less intuitive.

Suppose there is no path in `G` from `b` to `e`. Let `Reach(e)` be the set of vertices in `G` that have a path to `e`.

This forms a partition over `G` of vertices in `Reach(e)` (call this partition `R`) and vertices not (call this partition `!R`). We know for a fact that `b` is in the partition `!R`.

We also know for a fact there are no paths from `!R` to `R`. How so? Well, suppose there were such a path. Then the path includes at least one vertex `x \in !R` and at least one vertex `y \in R`. But if `e` is reachable from `y`, then `e` must also then be reachable from `x`! A contradiction, as we assumed `x \in !R`.

So not only does `Reach(e)` form a partition of vertices, but also the only paths that occur flow "out" from `R` and into `!R`. No paths from `!R` to `R` may exist.

Therefore, let define

```haskell
-- Map of vertices
f_V : V(G) -> V(J)
f_V x
  | x `in` R = 1
  | not (x `in` R) = 0

-- Map of edges
f_E : E(G) -> E(J)
f_E (a, b)
  | a `in` R && b `in` R = (1, 1)
  | a `in` R && not (b `in` R) = (1, 0)
  | not (a `in` R) && not (b `in` R) = (0, 0)
  -- This can never happen!
  | not (a `in` R) && (b `in` R) = undefined
```

We assert that `f` is well-defined. (This construction is simple enough that we will just hand-wave the proof of `f_V s = s' f_E` and `f_V t = t' f_E`. But know that it does hold!)

QED.

## Haskell

Ian raises the question: what's the relationship between functors in category theory and `Functor` typeclass in Haskell? (Or the `Functor` trait in Scala.)

```haskell
class Functor f where
    fmap :: a -> b -> (f a -> f b)
```

Imagine collecting all the types (not values!) in Haskell into a category `Hask`. The category-theoretic arrows in `Hask` is just the Haskellic arrow `->`. Think about it! It composes with `(.)` and there exists an identity arrow and it's associative. It meets all the requirements.

```
-- A valid composition operator for types
(.) :: (b -> c) -> (a -> b) -> (a -> c)
```

Read like that, we can think of this typeclass as taking an arrow in `Hask` -- that's the `a -> b` -- and returning another arrow in `Hask` -- that's the `f a -> f b`.

This might not seem like much, but it's in fact a functor!

In categories there may exist all sorts of different subcategories, and it's no different with `Hask`. If you take all the `Maybe` values, you'll find that they also form a category. In this subcategory we have objects `Maybe Int`, `Maybe String`, etc. And in this subcategory we also have arrows `Maybe String -> Maybe Int`, corresponding to `fmap (String -> Maybe)`. And, in fact, `fmap` for `Maybe` maps `id` to `id`.

So when you see

```haskell
instance Functor Maybe where
    fmap a2b Nothing = Nothing
    fmap a2b (Just a) = Just b
```

you can read it as a theorem: There exists a functor from category `Hask` (where objects are types and arrows are `(->)`) to the subcategory `Maybe` (where the objects are `Maybe a` for some type `a` and the arrows are still `(->)`).

In fact, these functors are endofunctors as they begin and end in the same category `Hask`.

## Session 11, Exercise 5

Suppose there exists an isomorphism `f` from `(Z, (+2))` to `(Z, (+3))`. We will attempt to find a contradiction.

First we need help: I assert that given any three distinct integers, two of them must be congruent modulo two (i.e. a multiple of two apart). This I assert without proof.

We need some additional help: I assert that `f(n + 2k) = f(n) + 3k` for any integer k. This follows from `f . (+2) = (+3) . f` -- simply repeatedly apply the composition for each multiple of two to yield a corresponding multiple of three. If that is confusing, look at this:

* `f(n + 2) = f(n) + 3`
* `f(n + 4) = f(n + 2) + 3 = f(n) + 6`
* `f(n + 6) = f(n + 4) + 3 = f(n) + 9`
* ...

Now: let `f` be such a map. Then there must exist an inverse, `g`, such that `g . (+3) = (+2) . f`. Now choose some integer `n`.

Then `n, n + 1, n + 2` must be three distinct integers.

Because `f` is an isomorphism, we know that `g(n), g(n + 1), g(n + 2)` must also be three distinct integers!

Therefore, by our lemma, at least two of them must be congruent modulo two. Without loss of generality, assume they are `g(n)` and `g(n + 2)`.

Then it must be the case that `g(n) = g(n + 2) + 2k` for some integer `k`.

It follows that:

* `f(g(n)) = f(g(n + 2) + 2k)` -- apply `f` to both sides
* `f(g(n)) = f(g(n + 2)) + 3k` -- lemma
* `n = n + 2 + 3k` -- cancel
* `3k + 2 = 0` -- rearrange and cancel
* `k = -2/3`

But this contradicts our assumption that `k` is an integer. QED!
