## Homework

Sessions 15, 16 (again)

## Functors

We widely agreed that the presentation of functors here is shoehorned into the discussion of monoids; best to consult Awodey.

The bulk of our time was spent on the following exercise.

## Session 15, Exercise 3

## Iteration

Fix `(Y, β)` to be the set `Y` equipped with endomap `β`.

Fix an element `y ∈ Y`. Then we may construct an arrow `f` from `(N, σ)` to `(Y, β)` such that

* `f(0) = y`
* `f(1) = β(y)`
* `f(2) = β(β(y))`
* ...

We assert this is a valid arrow in the category of endomaps; we leave the `f . σ = β . f` proof to the reader.

We call this process _iteration_: it takes an element `y` (or, equivalently, a map from `1` to `Y`) and yields an arrow in the category of endomaps.


## Evaluation

Now fix an arrow `f` from `(N, σ)` to `(Y, β)` in the category of endomaps.

Let `y = f(0)`.

We call this process _evaluation at zero_: given an arrow in the category of endomaps, it yields an element `y`.


## One inverses the other

We claim that iteration 'cancels out' evaluation at zero. This is not quite an isomorphic function (as it does not take place between sets) and this is not quite a functor (as we are merely considering two very specific endomaps and not all endomaps). This is a very strange question, in that regard.

But we do claim that they cancel each other other.

First, start with a `(Y, β)` and a `y ∈ Y`. Let `f` be the arrow constructed by iteration. We claim that evaluating `f` at 0 yields `y`. This holds trivially by definition.

Now start with an arrow `f` and let `y = f(0)` be the value computed by evaluating at zero, and furthermore let `g` be the arrow computed by iterating `y`. (This proof is given in the book, and we rephrase it here). Then:

> `f(0) = y = g(0)`.

Assume inductively that `f(n) = g(n)`. Then

> * `f(n + 1) = f(σ(n))` – by definition of `σ`
> * `         = β(f(n))` – by `f . σ = β . f`
> * `         = β(f(n))` – by `f . σ = β . f`
> * `         = β(g(n))` – by inductive assumption
> * `         = g(σ(n))` – as `g . σ = β . g`
> * `         = g(n + 1)`

By the principle of induction over natural numbers, `f(n) = g(n)` for all `n`. Since the natural numbers are our domain, we conclude `f = g`. QED.

## Significance

One might think of 'evaluation' as a way of packing all the information of a given arrow `f : (N, σ) -> (Y, β)` into the point `f(0) = y` – for an arrow originating from `(N, σ)`, this is enough data to encode everything about the arrow!

And in fact, we prove this is so by showing that iteration recovers the original arrow `f`.

By picking different arrows for `f`, we are able to 'capture' all the values in `Y`.

One might wonder if we could capture `β` as well. Exercises 4 and 5 indicate that we can: given an `f` that evaluates to `y` at 0, we simply evaluate `f . σ` at 0 to compute `β(y)`.

For a full discussion of this consequence, see Awodey's definition 9.39 of _natural numbers object_ in the 'Adjoint Functor Theorem' section. Quite a bit more machinery is needed to squeeze juice out of this idea.
