## Homework

Same as last week.

* Article 2, Section 10
* Article 3, Section 11
* Article 3, Section 12
* Article 3, Section 13

Attempt to do all exercises from Section 10, as they are challenging and rewarding.

## What are inclusion maps?

An inclusion map is a map `f : A -> B` such that `f(x) = x` for all x (implying, of course, that A is a subset of B). [For a more thorough discussion, consult your local massive online collaborative encyclopedia.](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Inclusion_map)

## Article 2, Section 10, Exercise 1

This was the bulk of the discussion this week.

Earlier in the article we proved this theorem:

> Fix an inclusion map `f: DB -> D` from a disk's boundary to a disk. Assume there is no continuous `g : D -> DB` such that `gf = 1` – this intuitively makes sense, as it would seem very difficult to 'pack' a disk's boundary into a disk without losing information along the way. (The disk's boundary has 'less room' than the disk itself.) Then, I assert that every continuous endomap on the disk has a fixed point.

What does it mean for a continuous endomap on the disk to have a fixed point? Well, take a map of NYC. Crumple the map. Place the map on your NYC apartment floor. Then there's always a point on the crumpled map in the exact place where the map indicates it should be, in actual NYC.

OK so that's not that interesting. This is more of a mathematical curiosity than antyhing.

Proof of theorem: suppose for a contradiction that no continuous endomap on the disk has a fixed point. We will show that this is a startlingly strong assertion, and leads to a contradiction of our assumptions.

Fix `e : D -> D` to be some endomap on the disk. We will construct a continuous `g : D -> DB` such that `gf` = `1`.

Fix a point `p` on the disk. What should `g(p)` equal, in order for `g(f(p)) = p`?

All we know is that `g(p) != p`. Therefore, we can construct a ray from `g(p)` to `p`. Let `r(p)` be the intersection of this ray with `DB`.

We now need to discharge the following lemmas:

* `r(p)` is defined for all `p` in the domain `DB`. This is true, by definition.

* `r(p)` is therefore a function from `D` to `DB`.

* `rf = 1_DB`. Let `p` be a point in `DB`. Then `f(p) = p` as we know `f` is an inclusion mapping; by construction of the ray and the intersection, `r(f(p)) = r(p) = p`. Thus, `rf = 1_DB`, a contradiction of our assumption.

This exercise asks us to prove a generalized version of this theorem:

> Fix an inclusion map `f : DB -> D` as before. For all two continuous endomaps from `D` to `D` (call them `e1, e2`) such that `e2f = f`, I assert there exists a point `x` in `D` such that `e1(x) = e2(x)`.

Like before, suppose for a contradiction that there exists no such point. Fix two endomaps `e1, e2`. We will attempt to lead to a contradiction of our assumptions.

Find a point `p` on the disk. We know `e1(p) != e2(p)`. Therefore, we can construct a ray from `e1(p)` to `e2(p)`. Let `r(p)` be the intersection of this ray with `DB`. Let us discharge these following lemmas:

* `r(p)` is defined for all `p` in the domain `DB`. This is true, by definitino.

* `r(p)` is therefore a function from `D` to `DB`.

* `r` is a retraction for `f`. Let `p` be a point in `DB`. We know `f(p) = p` by the definition of inclusion maps. We also know `e2(f(p)) = p`. Therefore, the intersection of the ray `e1(p) -> e2(p)` and `DB` is the point `p`. This is sufficient to show that following `f` from any point in `DB`, then following `r`, takes you back to where you started. Thus `r` is a retraction for `f`.

No retractions for `f` are supposed to exist! That is one of our retraction theorems. Therefore, there must exist such a point `x`.
