## Homework

Finish all the sessions in article II.

Do the quiz and test.

Optional, broccoli (good for you, and tasty when done right): read up to (but not including) '1.7 free categories' in Awodey. It's approximately 16 pages. The book is going to throw terms at you from various fields of mathematics. You can safely ignore:

* The examples of categories from topology
* 'Principal ideal', from abstract algebra, [though Wikipedia does a good job with the material](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Principal_ideal)
* Groups and group homomorphisms, from set theory

However, try to understand:

* The rigorous definition of categories
* These categories: `Set`, `0`, `1`, `2`, `3`, `Pos`, `Cat`
* Functors
* Monoid categories (categories with one object)
* Groups, from category theory (monoids where all arrows have inverses)
* Abstract vs. concrete categories
* The decomposition for any category into a concrete category (Cayley's decomposition)
* The product category of two categories
* The dual of a category
* The slice category of a category

This book covers a lot of ground in a short amount of time! You will be rewarded with a richer and more formal understanding of category theory, and possibly you might learn some Haskell along the way. Jot down any and all questions!

You can find a PDF of this book on Barnacles, or #categories.

## Cancellation

What is cancellation? The book mentions it in passing. We believe it's this:

> Fix a category and a morphism from the category `e`. `e` is epimorphic iff `xe = ye` implies `x = y` for all morphisms `x, y` in the category. We call this "canceling on the right."

> Fix a category and a morphism from the category `e`. `m` is monofmorphic iff `mx = my` implies `x = y` for all morphisms `x, y` in the category. We call this "canceling on the left."

(Awodey)

## Surjective, injective

[Surjective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Surjective_function) (a.k.a "onto") and [injective](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Injective_function) (a.k.a "one to one") functions come to us from the wonderful world of set theory and are best covered by Wikipedia. A function that is both is _bijective_.

These concepts generalize to epis, monos, and isos in category theory.

## The philosophy section

Was weird, and the less we say about it the better. Doug points out that the 'tennis players' example at the end is clarifying.

## The structure of homework from here on out

We're going to be more article-oriented, as the sessions vary in quality and relevance.

## Monoids

What are they?

OK, a little unavoidable amount of set theory:

* A binary operation `*` on a set `S` is a function `S x S -> S`. (Recall the definition of a function: maps every element of the domain to an element in the codomain, exactly once.)
* We say `R` has an _identity_ `e` if `R(e, x) = R(x, e) = x` for all `x` in `S`.
* We say `R` is _associative_ iff `R(R(a, b), c) = R(a, R(b, c))` for all `a, b, c`.
* If `S` equipped with `R` is associative, we say `(S, R)` is a _semigroup_.
* If `S` equipped with `R` has an identity and is associative, we say `(S, R)` is a _monoid_.
* (A monoid is alternatively a semigroup with an identity.)

Examples of monoids include the natural numbers equipped with addition, the natural numbers equipped with multiplication, Haskell lists equipped with concatenation, and [string tries equipped with merging](https://hackage.haskell.org/package/bytestring-trie-0.2.4/docs/Data-Trie.html).

Basically they appear all the goddamn time.

Monoids have an interesting application in category theory. You can show that every monoid induces a category:

* Fix a monoid: a set `S` equipped with `R`.
* Call the identity `e`.
* Put one object in the category. Doesn't matter what it is.
* Draw one arrow from the object to the object for each `x` in `S`.
* For each `x`, name its corresponding arrow `*x`.
* Proof that this is a well-defined category (I'm going to follow Awodey's definition here):
  * We have objects and arrows!
  * For each arrow `*x`, the codomain and the domain is the dummy object.
  * Let the composite of `*y` with `*x` be the arrow corresponding to `R(x, y)`. That is, `*y . *x = *R(x, y)`.
    * As there is but one object to serve as the domain and codomain, this composition is trivially well-defined.
  * Let `*e` be the identity arrow.
    * For all arrows `*x`, I assert that `*x . *e = *e . *x = *x`. This holds by the identity law `R(e, x) = R(x, e) = x`.
  * For all arrows `*x, *y, *z` I assert that `*x . (*y . *z) = (*x . *y) . *z`. This holds by the associativity law `R(z, R(y, x)) = R(R(z, y), x)`.

You can also show that every category with one object in it induces a monoid, a.k.a. the converse, although we'll leave that to the reader.

Since the proof works backwards and forwards, we can glibly say that a monoid from set theory is just a category with one object.

[See Bartosz Milewski's weblog for a discussion of this idea.](http://bartoszmilewski.com/2014/12/05/categories-great-and-small/)

If you happen to have a monoid category whose arrows all have inverses, then your category is also equivalent to a group. See Awodey for more details.
